It is extremely important to investigate the effect of the seismic performance of corrosion-damaged reinforced concrete (RC) members, in terms of strength and deformability, on the seismic performance of the entire building. This will allow a more accurate assessment of the seismic performance of RC structures with corroded members, including beams and columns. However, current methods of evaluating the seismic performance of RC structures fail to fully consider the influence of reinforcement corrosion and other performance deterioration of RC members. The main objective of this study is to propose a practical method of evaluating the seismic performance of RC structures with corrosion-damaged members, identifying factors contributing to structural performance deterioration based on strength and deformability for direct, quantitative evaluation of seismic performance. To achieve the aforementioned objective, the authors examined the effects of reinforcement corrosion on the structural behavior of RC beams and factors contributing to structural performance deterioration. Past experiments verified the strong correlation between the half-cell potential (HCP) before and after reinforcement corrosion and the reduction factor based on energy absorption capacity. However, current research evaluates the correlation between the extent of corrosion and structural performance deterioration of RC beam members, which are not members that resist lateral force. As such, the results cannot be directly applied to the evaluation of the seismic performance of RC structures containing corrosion-damaged members. To achieve this study’s main purpose of proposing a practical method of evaluating the seismic performance of RC structures comprised of corrosion-damaged members, analytical methods including structural experiments should be applied to corrosion-damaged lateral resisting members, namely, column members of the shear failure type with non-seismic details. This study performed cyclic loading tests on columns of the shear failure type having reinforcement corrosion to examine the correlation between HCP before and after corrosion and seismic performance deterioration. At the same time, finite element analysis (FEA) was carried out in consideration of the weakened bonding between steel and concrete, so as to analyze the correlation between structural performance deterioration before and after corrosion of shear columns. Through a comparison of the experimental findings and FEA results, this study proposed a seismic performance reduction factor in relation to the extent of corrosion of shear columns.
Seismic Performance Evaluation of Corrosion-Damaged Reinforced Concrete Columns Controlled by Shear Based on Experiment and FEA