Coventry 
University 

Coventry University Repository for the Virtual Environment 
(CURVE) 

Author names:  Lizarazo-Marriaga, J. and Claisse, P.A. 
Title: Determination of the concrete chloride diffusion coefficient based on an 
electrochemical test and an optimization model 
Article & version: Post-print 
Original citation & hyperlink:  
Lizarazo-Marriaga, J. and Claisse, P.A. (2009) Determination of the concrete chloride 
diffusion coefficient based on an electrochemical test and an optimization model. 
Materials Chemistry and Physics, volume 117 (2-3): 536–543. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2009.06.047 

Copyright © and Moral Rights are retained by the author(s) and/ or other 
copyright owners. A copy can be downloaded for personal non-commercial 
research or study, without prior permission or charge. This item cannot be 
reproduced or quoted extensively from without first obtaining permission in 
writing from the copyright holder(s). The content must not be changed in any way 
or sold commercially in any format or medium without the formal permission of 
the copyright holders. 

This document is the author’s final manuscript version of the journal article, 
incorporating any revisions agreed during the peer-review process. Some 
differences between the published version and this version may remain and you 
are advised to consult the published version if you wish to cite from it. 

Available in the CURVE Research Collection: May 2012 

http://curve.coventry.ac.uk/open  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Determination of the concrete chloride diffusion coefficient based on 
an    electrochemical test and an optimization model 

Juan Lizarazo-Marriagaa, Peter Claisseb  

a,b Departamento de Ingeniería Civil, Universidad Nacional, Bogotá, Colombia. lizarazj@coventry.ac.uk 
b Materials Applied Research Group, Coventry University COV 5FB, UK. P.Claisse@coventry.ac.uk 

Abstract 

The chloride diffusion coefficient is an indication of the capacity of any type of concrete to 
resist  chloride  penetration  and  is  used  to  predict  the  service  life  of  reinforced  concrete 
structures.  Its  determination  has  been  subject  of  intense  study  in  the  last  50  years  and 
today  there  is  no  complete  agreement  in  the  methodologies  used.  In  addition,  its 
experimental  determination  is  time  and  recourse  consuming.  As  alternative,  this  paper 
presents a new methodology to find the fundamental properties of concrete including the 
diffusion coefficients. From the measurement of the electrical properties of concrete during 
a  migration  test  and  using  and  integrated  physical-neural  network  model  the  chloride 
related  properties  can  be  found.  Results  of  experiments  of  normal  diffusion  were 
compared with the results of the new methodology and gave encouraging results.  

Keywords: Concrete, diffusion, chloride migration, neural networks 

1. Introduction 

Corrosion  of  reinforcing  steel  is  the  major  cause  of  deterioration  of  reinforced  concrete 
structures.  Carbon dioxide and especially chlorides are the main causes of corrosion. The 
chloride diffusion coefficient defines the capacity of any specific concrete to resist chloride 
penetration and is used to predict the service life of reinforced concrete structures. Usually 
it is measured experimentally with self (gravity) diffusion or migration tests, but differences 
can  be  found  in  the  numerical  values  of  the  coefficients  depending  on  the  methodology 
used [1]. Either diffusion or migration tests can be done under steady state or non-steady 
state conditions.  Pure diffusion tests take a long time but migration tests are performed in 
relatively short time.  

Salt ponding [2] and Bulk diffusion [3] are examples of non steady state chloride diffusion 
tests  where  the  apparent  diffusion  coefficient  is  determined  by  fitting  profiles  of  the  acid 
soluble  chloride  concentration  to  Fick’s  second  law  of  diffusion  [4].  Steady  state  chloride 
diffusion  tests  are  more  time  consuming  and  are  calculated  using  the  Fick’s  first  law  of 
diffusion  [5].    They  are  made  in  a  traditional  diffusion  cell  setup  where  the  upstream 
compartment  is  the  chloride  source  and  the  downstream  compartment  must  be  chloride 
free at the start of the test. The chloride flux is calculated measuring the rate of change of 
chloride concentration in one of the compartments after the steady state is reached.  

Migration (otherwise known as electromigration) tests differ from diffusion tests because a 
constant  electrical  potential  difference  is  applied  across  the  concrete,  so  that  the 
calculation  of  the  diffusion  coefficient  is  based  on  the  Nernst-Planck  equation  [6]  rather 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
than  on  Fick’s  law.  The  Nordtest  Method  NT  492  [7]  is  an  example  of  non-steady  state 
migration tests. It was developed by Tang and Nilsson [8] who provided the mathematical 
theory  for  calculating  the  effective  diffusion  coefficient.  The  Nordtest  Method  NT  355 
standard  [9],  and  the  Japanese  JSCE-G571-2003    [10]  specify  test  methods  in  a  steady 
state  condition.  For  those  the  flux  is  calculated  according  to  the  measured  change  of 
concentration  of  chlorides  when  the  ions  passing  through  the  sample  have  reached  a 
steady state. The migration coefficient is calculated using the Nernst-Planck or the Nernst-
Einstein [11] equations.  

Regardless  of  the  experimental method  used  to  find  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  there  are 
some  difficulties  with  each  procedure.  For  example,  in  addition  to  the  problem  of  the 
duration  of  the  tests  the  determination  of  chloride  concentrations  either  in  solutions  or  in 
concrete  requires  special  equipment  and  the  laboratory  work  is  time  consuming. 
Additionally, all the procedures assume no depletion of chlorides in the source reservoirs, 
a  situation  which  requires  the  continuous  replacement  of  the  solutions  or,  at  least,  the 
monitoring  of  the  concentration,  even  if  large  quantities  of  initial  solution  are  used.  In 
addition, the effect of other ionic species and their interaction with chlorides is neglected. 
Finally,  if  the  chloride  penetration  determined  with  the  colorimetric  method  [12],  it  is  not 
easy to measure and has a high variability. 

In  order  to  offer  an  alternative  to  the  standard  methods  for  calculating  the  chloride 
coefficient  of  diffusion  for  concrete,  this  paper  presents  a  new  procedure  consisting  of  a 
new electrochemical test and a computational method. The principal aim of the paper is to 
present  the  theoretical  basis  of  a  new  method.  This  new  method  consists  of  the 
experimental determination of the electrical current and the electrical  membrane potential 
during  a  migration  test  similar  to  that  proposed  by  ASTM  C1202  [13].    The  chloride 
transport  related  properties  are  determined  with  an  integrated  physical-neural  network 
model. The computational model proposed uses the Nernst-Planck equation and accounts 
for the interaction of all the species involved by changing the membrane potential voltage 
in  order  to  avoid  any  charge  surplus  inside  the  concrete  sample.  In  addition,  the  model 
uses  an  artificial  neural  network  to  optimize  the  experimental  results  to  calculate  the 
chloride  related  properties.  The  validity  of  the  new  methodology  was  checked  by 
comparing the chloride coefficients obtained from it with the chloride coefficients obtained 
with a traditional diffusion test. 

2. Theoretical aspects of the membrane potential and current during a migration test 

The Nernst-Planck equation defines the ionic movements in a fully saturated concrete due 
to the chemical and electrical potential [6]. 

(1) 

where  ci  is  the  ionic  concentration  of  species  i  in  the  pore  fluid;  x  the  distance;  zi  the 
electrical charge  of  species  I;  F  the  Faraday  constant;  E  is the  electrical potential;  E/dx 
the electrical field; Ji is the flux of specie i; Di is the diffusion coefficient of species  i; R is 
the gas constant; and T is absolute temperature.  

In  a  concrete  migration  test,  in  addition  to  the  external electrical field  applied  there  is an 
internal electrical field produced because of the interactions among all the ions involved in 
the test (Cl-, OH-, Na+ and K+). As a result, the electrical field contained in the term for the 

2 

xEcDRTFzxcDJiiiiii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
migration  flux  of  equation  1  does  not  depend  only  on  the  constant  external  electrical 
potential  applied;  it  is  also  related  with  the  electrical  membrane  potential,  which  is  the 
additional  voltage  generated  due  to  the  requirements  of  charge  neutrality.  Different  ions 
have  different  mobility  [14]  and  diffuse  or  migrate  at  different  speeds,  so  an  excess  of 
charge  builds up  this membrane  potential in  order to  compensate the  flux  of the  species 
and  keep  the  electroneutrality  of  the  system.  Equation  2  shows  the  total  electrical  field 
formed  by  the  external  voltage  and  the  membrane  potential,  where 
    is  the  external 
electrical  voltage  applied  and  Ep  is  the  membrane  potential.  A  more  complex  expression 
can be found if the Nernst-Planck equation includes a chemical activity coefficient ( ) [15], 
however, it  has been proved  that  the  activity  term  does not  increase  the  accuracy  of  the 
results in a migration concrete test [16, 17]. 

(2) 

Xinying  Lu  [11]  stated  that  if  concrete  is  considered  a  solid  electrolyte,  the  diffusivity  of 
charged species i is related to its partial conductivity 
i, and this relationship is know as the 
Nernst-Einstein  equation.  If  the  partial  conductivity  and  the  concentration  are  know,  the 
diffusion coefficient of a species can be found from equation 3.  

(3) 

The overall conductivity of concrete ( ) can be related with the partial conductivity of one 
specie ( i) 

Where ti is the transference number of species i, which is defined as  

(4) 

(5) 

Where Qi  is the charge contribution of specie i and Q the total charge passed through the 
sample. The total charge can be expressed as a function of the coefficient of diffusion for 
specie  i  (equation  6).    Equations  2  and  6  show  that  the  diffusion  coefficient  is  strongly 
related  to  the  charge  (area  under  the  graph  of  current  versus  time)  and  the  membrane 
potential. 

(6) 

In  a  chloride  mono-ion  system,  defined  as  a  system  where  chlorides  are  isolated  of  any 
interaction with other ions, the mathematical solution for the Nernst-Planck equation for a 
semi-infinite homogeneous medium is [8]: 

(7) 

3 

iiiiiiiipcDzxcDzFRTxxExxE2iiiicFzRTD22iitiiQQtiiiiiiiDcFzQRTQ22DtaDtxercfDtaDtxercfectxcaxs222),( 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Where c(x,t) is the concentration of chloride after a time t  at a distance x form the surface 
of  the  sample,  ercf  is  the  complementary  error  function  erf,  cs  is  the  steady  chloride 
concentration at the surface, and a is a constant related with the external voltage applied 
and is defined by equation 8. 

(8) 

,  and  from  equations  1  and  7,  the  total  current  for  a 
From  Faraday’s  Law, 
chloride  mono  ion  system,  can  be  expressed  as  equation  9,  where  A  is  the  area  of  the 
cross-section of the sample. 

(9) 

3.  Experiments 

3.1. Test Details 

The  tests  carried  out  as  part  of  this  research  are  summarised  in  the  following  section. 
Each test was run twice and the result shown is the average of both results 

3.1.2. Current and membrane potential in the ASTM C1202 test  

The procedure used to measure the electrical current was according to ASTM C1202. In 
this,  a  steady  external  electrical  potential  of  60  volts  D.C  was  applied  to  a  sample  of 
concrete of 50 mm thick and 100 mm diameter for 6 hours.  The anode and cathode were 
filled with 0.30 N sodium hydroxide and 3.0% sodium chloride solutions respectively. The 
samples were prepared before the test in conformity with the standard.  

In  addition  to  the  standard  test,  a  salt  bridge  was  added  in  the  middle  of  the  sample  to 
check  the  voltage distribution.  A hole of 4 mm  diameter and  6-9 mm  deep  was  drilled  at 
the  mid-point.  The  salt  bridge  used  was  a  solution  of  0.1  M  potassium  chloride  (KCl)  in 
order  to  avoid  any  junction  potential  at  the  interface  of  the  salt  solution  and  the  pore 
solution. The voltage was measured using a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) relative to 
the cathode cell. The current through the concrete and the voltage at the mid-point were 
measured continuously every 10 seconds with a data logger. The membrane potential was 
calculated  by  subtracting  the  value  of  the  voltage  measured  from  the  initial  value 
measured  at  the  start  of  the  test.    The  value  of  voltage  measured  at  any  time  in  the 
midpoint position is given in equation 10. 

(10) 

V corresponds to the membrane potential, VTi is the voltage measured at time t, and V0 is 
the voltage at the start of the test. More detail of the experiment can be found in reference 
[14].  Figure  1  shows  the  test.    The  results  were  analysed  using  the  computer  model 
described in section 4 of this paper. 

4 

RTzFaAFJziiiiDttaDxerfcaetDcAFDicltDtaDxclsclclcl2214)(20VVVTi 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
3.1.2. Chloride Diffusion Test 

The sawn surface of 100 mm diameter and 100 mm high concrete cylinders were placed in 
contact with a solution of sodium chloride. To prepare the samples, the curved surface of 
each cylinder was covered with a rubber coating in order to avoid moisture exchange and 
carbonation  during  the  test.  After the  samples  were  coated,  the  surface  that  would  be  in 
contact  with  chlorides  was  in  placed  contact  with  a  solution  of  0.5  g/l  of  CaOH  for  one 
week to avoid any initial sorption effect when the chloride solution was introduced. Figure 
2 shows the test. 

The external concentration of chloride was 7% NaCl and it was renewed every 3  weeks. 
After  12  weeks  of  diffusion,  the  chloride  penetration  depth  was  measured  using  the 
colorimetric method [18]. Each sample was split axially and sprayed with a solution of 0.1 
M silver nitrate.  After 15 minutes a white silver chloride precipitation on the split surface 
was  visible  and  the  penetration  depth  was  measured.  It  was  assumed  that  the  free 
chloride concentration at which the colour changes is around 0.07 N for ordinary Portland 
cement concrete [7].  

The  solution  of  the  Nernst-Planck  equation  presented  in  equation  7  for  the  condition  of 
zero external voltage gives equation 11 and corresponds to the solution of Fick’s second 
law presented by Crank [19]. 

(11) 

Where c0 is the initial concentration of chlorides.  In this study it was assumed that at the 
start  of  the  test  the  initial  concentration  of  chlorides  inside  the  sample  was  zero  (c0=0)    
The 
the  chloride  surface 
concentration (cs), and the time of the diffusion test were known so the diffusion coefficient 
could be calculated using equation 11, 

free  chloride  concentration, 

the  depth  of  penetration, 

3.1.3. Open porosity 

The  open  porosity  accessible  by  water  (P)  was  measured  using  the  simple  method  of 
water  displacement.  The  central  part  of  each  cylinder  (30  mm  thickness)  was  vacuum 
saturated  until  constant  weight  and  weighed  in  water  (W w)  and  air  (Wa). They  were  then 
dried in an oven at 105 C until constant weight and weighed again (Wd). The porosity was 
found with equation 12. Three replicates were tested for each mix.  

 (12) 

3.2. Concrete Mixes 

Samples of type I ordinary Portland cement (OPC) with different water cement ratios were 
mixed.  Table  1  shows  the  mix  designs  and  the  nomenclature  used  in  this  study.  All  the 
tests were made on samples around 6 months old which were kept in a controlled humidity 
and  temperature  room  until  each  test  was  started.  During  the  mixing,  depending  on  the 

5 

))4()((),(00tDxerfcccctxcswadaWWWWP 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
water  content,  the  mixes  had  different  flow  properties.  In  order  to  avoid  affecting  the 
strength  because  of  the  differences  in  the  mix  compaction,  all  the  mixes  were  therefore 
compacted  mechanically  with  a  vibrating  table.  The  moulds  were  filled  with  concrete  in 
three layers and compacted to remove the air and reach the maximum density.  

4. Computer Model 

The computational model used two main techniques. An electro-diffusion numerical routine 
was used for calculating the transient current and the mid-point membrane potential during 
migration  and  diffusion  tests.  This  programme  uses  the  physical  transport  properties  as 
input  data  and  gives  as  outputs  the  transient  current  and  the  electrical  membrane 
potential.  However,  as  in  reality  the  physical  transport  properties  are  unknown,  a  neural 
network  algorithm  was  trained  to  optimize  those  physical  properties.  As  a  result  of 
combining  both  techniques,  the  transport  properties  of  a  concrete  sample  could  be 
determined  from  experimental  observations  of  mid-point  membrane  potential  and  current 
measured simultaneously during a migration test. 

4.1. Numerical electro-diffusion model 

through  microscopic 

time  and  space  steps 

The numerical model used in this research works by repeated application of the Nernst  – 
Planck  equation 
ions 
simultaneously.  The  ions  considered  were  potassium  found  in  the  initial  pore  solution  of 
the sample, sodium and hydroxide found in the pore solution and in the external cells, and 
chloride found in the external cells. The effects of the membrane potential are applied by 
distorting the voltage in each space step and checked by ensuring that charge neutrality is 
maintained throughout the sample at all times for all the ions together. At each time step 
adjustments are made to the voltage to ensure that there is not charge surplus inside the 
sample.  

for  various 

In the model the concentration of ions is defined in two ways: the free ions per unit volume 
of  liquid  (Cl)  and  the  total  ions  per  unit  volume  of  solid  (Cs).  The  ratio  of  those 
concentrations  is  named  the  binding  capacity  factor  ( ).  In  the  same  way,  the  intrinsic 
coefficient (Dint) defines the transport of matter when the flux is calculated per unit cross-
sectional  area  of  the  pores  and  the  concentration  in  the  free  liquid.  In  contrast,  the 
apparent  diffusion  coefficient  (Dapp)  defines  the  transport  of  any  ion  when  the  flux  is 
calculated  per  unit  area  of  the  porous  material  and  the  average  concentration  in  the 
material. The reason why both coefficients are presented is because the computer model 
calculates  the  intrinsic  coefficient,  but  the  apparent  coefficients  are  normally  used  to 
predict the service life of concrete structures. 

The model can be set under two conditions; first, a migration test with an applied steady 
external  voltage  (
0)  can  be  modelled  under  a  condition  called  voltage  control  in  this 
paper. In this, for any time step, although the current density into any point is equal to the 
current out of it (Kirchoff’s law), the total current is transient and changes with time (but not 
with position). The second condition called current control, allows the model to simulate a 
self  diffusion  test  under  no  external  field  applied  ( =0).  In  this,  in  addition  to  the  voltage 
correction necessary to prevent a charge surplus, the programme keeps the total current 
equal to a pre-set value (zero for this test).  

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As  outputs  in  both  conditions  the  model  calculates  the  transient  current  caused  by  each 
ion,  the  concentrations,  the  voltage  variation  and  the  membrane  potential  at  all  times 
during the test and in each position [20]. The model was written in visual basic and run as 
a macro in Microsoft Excel. 

4.2. Neural network optimization model 

To train the network the numerical electro-diffusional model was run many times in order 
to obtain a database of the input and the corresponding target vectors. During the training 
the outputs of the model were used as inputs for the neural network and all the data were 
normalized between -1 and +1 in order to avoid the influence of the scale of the physical 
quantities.  In  the  same  way,  a  tangential  transfer  function  was  limited  to  be  between  -1 
and  +1.  The  Levenberg-Marquardt  training  algorithm  was  used.  Figure  3  shows  a 
conceptual diagram of the integrated model 

The  optimization  model  uses  a  feed-forward  back  propagation-network  with  a  multilayer 
architecture. Six neurons define the input layer, corresponding to values of the current and 
the mid-point membrane potential at different times. A middle hidden layer has 3 neurons, 
and  the  output  layer  output  has  7  neurons  corresponding  to  the  intrinsic  diffusion 
coefficients  of  Cl-,  OH-,  Na+  and  K+,  the  porosity,  the  hydroxide  composition  in  the  pore 
solution at the start of the test, and the binding capacity factor for chloride ions. The neural 
network  model  was  constructed  using  the  neural  network  tool  box  of  Matlab®.  Figure  4 
shows the input, the hidden layer and the outputs of the network. 

4.3. Integrated numerical- neural network model 

Obtaining  the  related  transport  chloride  properties  of  concrete  from  measurements  of 
current  has  been  reported  recently  [21];  however,  long  durations  and  steady  state 
conditions  are  required.  In  the  present  research,  with  the  simultaneous  measurement  of 
the  current  and  the  mid-point  membrane  potential,  it  is  possible  to  determine  a  unique 
combination  of  the  transport  properties  by  using  the  trained  neural  network.  In  order  to 
simulate the transport properties of concrete and taking into account the complex variables 
related with the physical phenomenon some assumptions were made:  

(1)  The  only  ions  that  interact  with  the  cement  matrix  products  are  chlorides  and  that 
interaction  is  defined  with  a  linear  binding  isotherm.  Although  has  been  demonstrated 
experimentally [22] that non linear isotherms reflects the absorption phenomena better, the 
model  uses  an  average  linear  isotherm  that  represents  in  a  good  way  the  average 
adsorption of chlorides.  

(2)  The  relationship  between  chloride  intrinsic  diffusion  (Dint-cl)  and  apparent  diffusion 
coefficients  (Dapp-cl)  is  defined  through  the  porosity  of  the  material  ( )  and  the  binding 
  is  a  constant  for 
capacity  factor  ( ).  The  assumption  of  a  linear  isotherm  means  that 
each ion.  It is important to notice again that the apparent diffusion coefficient is the ratio of 
the flux to the total concentration of chlorides (free and adsorbed) defined per unit volume 
of  the  medium.  In  contrast,  the  intrinsic  diffusion  coefficient  is  the  ratio  of  the  flux  in  the 
pores  to  the  concentration  of  free  ions  in  the  pore  solution  per  volume  of  liquid  in  the 
pores. 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) 

(3)  At  the  start  of  the  test  the  chemical  pore  solution  is  composed  of  ions  OH-,  K+,  and  
Na+,  and,  in  order  to  keep  electroneutrality,  it  was  assumed  that  the  concentration  of 
hydroxyl  ions  is  equilibrated  with  a  proportion  of  33%  of  sodium  and  66%  of  potassium. 
This assumption was based on published results  [23]. 

5.  Results and Discussion 

5.1.  Experimental  determination  of  the  transient  current,  membrane  potential  and 
the diffusion coefficients 

The average current measured for each mix in the migration test is shown in figure 5. As 
was  expected,  an  increase  in  the  water  cement  ratio  gave  an  increase  in  the  current 
passed,  and  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  temperature  of  the  sample.  The  measured 
maximum value of temperature in the anode solution was of 63, 44, and 36  C for samples 
of water cement ratio of 0.6, 0.5 and 0.4 respectively, and the values of charge calculated 
as the area under the graph of current versus time were 9580, 6863 and 4149 coulombs 
for samples of water cement ratio of 0.6, 0.5 and 0.4 respectively. 

The  membrane  potential  measured  is  shown  in  figure  6a.  For  some  samples,  there  was 
signal noise which may have been caused by the random distribution of aggregate limiting 
the contact between the salt bridges and the pore volume. This was substantially reduced 
by slightly increasing the depths of the drilled holes for the salt bridges. The experimental 
results were filtered with commercial curve fitting software in order to find the best trend of 
the  results  and  this  can  be  seen  in  figure  6b.  The  average  membrane  potential for each 
mix is shown in figure 6c, it can be seen that for all mixes the membrane potential showed 
a rise from its initial value, however, mix OPC-6 showed an initial decrease during the first 
2 hours.  

The chloride diffusion coefficients obtained from the gravity diffusion test and equation 11 
were called DFick in this paper and are shown in figure 7. As was expected, an increase in 
the  water  cement  ratio  yielded  an  increase  in  the  coefficient  of  diffusion.  The  values  of 
chloride diffusion coefficient obtained experimentally are in the normal ranges reported in 
the  literature  [24],  however,  the  concrete  tested  can  be  ranked  as  high  permeability 
because  the  diffusion  coefficients  obtained  experimentally  were  greater  than  10-12  m2/s. 
The  high  values  of  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  are  in  accordance  with  the  high  values  of 
porosity measured. 

5.2. Prediction of chloride related properties 

The  trained  neural network  was  fed  with  the  values  for the transient  current and  the  mid 
point  voltage  from  the  migration  test  and  the  chloride  transport  related  properties  were 
calculated. As a measure of the reliability of the network, the transport properties obtained 
were  used  to  run  the  electro-diffusional  model  in  order  to  obtain  a  simulated  transient 
current  and  mid  point  membrane  potential.  The  comparison  of  these  curves  is  shown  in 
figure 8.  It can be seen that for the current the simulations are in a very good agreement 
with  the  experiments,  and  for  the  membrane  potential  although  there  are  some  small 
differences there is a well defined trend.   

8 

ClappClDDint 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  differences  between  the  measured  and  simulated  membrane  potential  can  be 
explained by factors related with the accuracy of the measurement device used during the 
experiment, the heating of the material under an electrical field, or the variability of the test. 
However, it may be seen that the neural network is able to give a good fit to the profile of 
the membrane potential given that the number of possible combinations of properties that 
yield a given current and membrane potential is almost infinite.  

The calculated transport properties include the porosity, the binding capacity factor and the 
initial  hydroxide  composition  at  the  start  of  the  test.  As  was  expected,  the  porosity 
increases with an increase of the water binder ratio (figure 9a). In the figure it can be seen 
that  the  trend  of  the  measured  porosity  is  similar  to  that  calculated;  however  some 
differences  arise  from  errors  in  either  the  numerical  and  experimental  methods.  The 
binding capacity factor decreases as the water binder ratio increases, presumably is due 
to the refining of the hydration compounds enabling them to bind more free chloride ions 
(figure 9b). The calculated initial chemical content of the pore solution increases with and 
increase  in  the  water binder ratio.   This can  be  attributed  to the higher amount of  water, 
which can keep more alkalis in the pore solution.  

The  calculated  intrinsic  diffusion  coefficients  for all  the  species  involved  in  the  simulation 
(Cl-,  OH-,  Na+,  K+)  are  shown  in  figure  10.  As  was  stated  by  other  researchers  [6],  the 
anions  had  a  smaller  diffusion  coefficient  than  chlorides  and  hydroxides,  except  than  for 
mix  6,  in  which  hydroxide  and  sodium  have  a  similar  diffusivity.  As  was  expected,  the 
calculated  numerical  values  of  the  intrinsic  coefficients  for  all  the  species  are,  for  all  the 
cases, smaller than the coefficients of diffusion in infinite diluted solutions as can be seen 
in  any  electrochemistry  textbook.  The  values  obtained  are  physically  possible  and  are  in 
acceptable ranges.  

In  the  same  way  that  the  measured  chloride  diffusion  coefficient  increases  its  value  with 
the  increase  of  the  water  binder  ratio,  the  calculated  chloride  intrinsic  coefficient  also 
increases.  The  relationship  between  the  chloride  coefficients  obtained  from  the  diffusion 
test  (using  Fick’s  law)  and  the  migration  test  (using  the  integrated  model)  is  shown  in 
figure 11. The correlation coefficient R2 was 0.99, indicating a strong relationship between 
the  coefficients.  The  differences  arise  because  of  the  physical  equations  used.  Both 
coefficients  are  related  but  are  defined  in  a  different  way.  The  first  was  obtained  with  
Fick’s law under conditions of pure diffusion and the second was obtained with the Nernst-
Planck  equation,  including  chloride  adsorption  and  interaction  among  all  the  species 
involved.  The  differences  were  overcome  by  using  the  numerical  model  as  described 
below.   

5.3. Simulation of the current and chloride concentration  

With  the  aim  of  showing  the  simulation  of  the  current  and  the  chloride  concentration  for 
mix 4, the gravity chloride diffusion test was simulated using the computer model. The time 
selected to show the evolution of the current was 36 days. Figure 12 shows the profile of 
the current when the phenomenon was simulated using three different approaches.   

(1) The electro-diffusion current control model with zero current. As was expected, the total 
current  was  equal  to  zero  at  any  point  of  the  sample.  The  current  density  generated  by 
each ion was annulled by the current density generated by the remaining ions. When any 
species diffused through the sample a charge surplus was avoided through the generation 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of  a  membrane  potential.    The  authors  suggest  that  this  simulation  best  represents  the 
physical situation in the sample. 

(2)  The  electro-diffusion  model  with  no  voltage  correction.  In  this,  in  the  solution  of  the 
Nernst-Planck  equation  there  is  no  membrane  potential  generation.  As  a  result,  the 
Nernst-Planck equation was solved using Fick’s first law for each ion. The total current had 
a value of 2.1 mA near the surface because at that point the flux of chloride and sodium 
was  high.  In  the  same  way,  far  away  from  the  surface  the  current  decreases.  The  total 
current for any point is the result of the sum of the current driven for each ion, according to 
its charge and diffusion direction.  

(3)  The  theoretical  equation  9.  In  this  it  is  supposed  that  the  only  species  involved  are 
chlorides.  The  total  current  profile  obtained  was  similar  to  the  previous  condition  but  the 
total current near to the surface was 4 mA. 

The  chloride  concentration  profile  at  different  distaces  from  the  external  NaCl  solution  is 
shown in figure 13. The time selected to show the evolution of the concentration along the 
sample was 90 days. As for the current, different aproches were used:  

(1) the electro-diffusion current control model with zero current using the transport related 
properties calculated with the model.  

(2)  The  electro-diffusion  model  with  no  voltage  correction  using  the  transport  related 
properties obtained.  

(3) The model, but with only chlorides present in the system so there was no pore solution 
or  chloride  binding.  The  chloride  diffusion  coefficient  used  was  the  obtained  from  the 
neural network.  

(4)  Equation  7,  which  without  an  external  applied  voltage  becomes  equation  11  (Fick’s 
law), using the intrinsic chloride diffusion coefficient obtained from the neural network. 

(5) Fick’s law, but the concentration was obtained using the chloride coefficient of diffusion 
obtained with the diffusion test  DFick. This represents the profile of a function that passes 
through two points where the concentration was measured experimentally. However, some 
deviations  can  be  expected  because  of  the  variability  and  uncertainty  in  the  assumption 
that the change of colour in the colorimetric method is at 0.07 mol/l.  

Approaches (3) and (4), as was expected, had the same profile; the chloride concentration 
was  the  same for both  conditions.   This  provides  a  check  that, for a  simplified  condition, 
the computer simulation gave the correct solution. 

It can be seen from the graph that for methods 3 and 4 that permit development of a net 
total  current  (which  is  not  possible  in  reality  because  there  is  no  circuit)  the  chloride 
concentration  is  higher.  The  higher  the  total  current  developed,  the  higher  the  chloride 
profile simulated.  
Method  5  represents  the  real  free  chloride  concentration  (as  measured  in  the  diffusion 
test),  and  it  can  be  seen  that  it  has  a  similar  trend  to  the  one  predicted  with  the  current 
control model (method 1).  

10 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 Conclusions 

  The  experimental-numerical  procedure  proposed  gives  viable  results  for  the 
fundamental  properties  of  concrete.  The  initial  hydroxide  composition  of  the  pore 
solution, the chloride binding capacity, the porosity, and the diffusion coefficients for 
all the species involved were estimated with good results. 

  The  standard  determination  of  the  chloride  diffusion  coefficients  is  time  and 
resource  consuming,  in  addition  to  the  uncertainties  of  the  methods  and  theories 
used. The neural network methodology proposed is an alternative that can yield to 
the accurate calculation of the concrete diffusivity with a short and inexpensive test. 

  The  straightforward  application  of  Fick’s  law  to  simulate  chloride  diffusion  in 
concrete  which  has  been  used  by  many  authors  in  the  past  can  be  significantly 
improved  by  using  a  numerical  simulation  which  includes  the  effects  of  the  other 
ions in the system. 

7. Acknowledgments 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  the  support  of  the  Universidad  Nacional  de  Colombia, 
COLFUTURO, and the Programme Al an (the European Union programme of High Level 
Scholarships for Latin America, scholarship No. E06d101124CO).  

8. References 

1.  C.C. Yang, L.C. Wang, Materials Chemistry and Physics 85 (2004) 266. 

2.  AASHTO,  Standard  Method  of  Test  for  Resistance  of  Concrete  to  Chloride  Ion 

Penetration, AASHTO T 259-80. 1997. 

3.  NTBUILD-443, Concrete Hardened: Accelerated Chloride Penetration. 1995. 

4.  M. Nokken, A. Boddy, R.D. Hooton, M. Thomas, Cem. Concr. Res. 36 (2006) 200. 

5.  G.K.Glass, N.R. Buenfeld, Journal of Materials Science, 33 (1998) 5111.  

6.  C. Andrade, Cem. Concr. Res. 23 (1993) 724. 

7.  NTBUILD-492,  Concrete,  mortar  and  cement-based  repair  materials:  Chloride 

migration coefficient from non-steady-state migration experiments. 1999. 

8.  T Luping, L. Nilsson, ACI Materials Journal, 89 (1992)  49. 

9.  NTBUILD-335,  Concrete,  mortar  and  cement-based  repair  materials:  Chloride 

diffusion coefficient from migration cell experiments. 1997. 

10. JSCE-G571,  Test  method  for  effective  diffusion  coefficient  of  chloride  ion  in 

concrete by migration. Japan Society of Civil Engineers 2003. 

11. X. Lu, Cem. Concr. Res. 27 (1997) 293. 

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12. Q. Yuan, C. Shi, F. He, G. Schutter, K. Audenaert, K. Zheng, Cem. Concr. Res. 38 

(2008) 1177 

13.  ASTM-C1202,  Standard  Test  Method for Electrical Indication  of  Concrete’s Ability 

to Resist Chloride Ion Penetration. 2005. 

14.  J. Lizarazo-Marriaga, P. Claisse, Electrochimica Acta 54 (2008) 2761.  

15.  O.  Truc,  PhD thesis,  Prediction  of  Chloride  Penetration  into  Saturated  Concrete  - 

Multi - Species - Approach, Chalmers University, Sweden, 2000. 

16.  E. Samson, J. Marchand, K. Snyder, Materials and Structures 36 (2003) 156. 

17.  L. Tang, Cem. Concr. Res. 29 (1999) 1469. 

18.  E. Meck, V. Sirivivatnanon, Cem. Concr. Res. 33 (2003) 1113. 

19.  Crank, J., The Mathematics of Diffusion, second Edition, Oxford University Press. 

1976. 

20.  P. Claisse, T. W. Beresford, Fourth CANMET/ACI International Conference on 

Durability of Concrete, Australia, ACI - SP 170 (1997) 1119. 

21.  C. Yang, S. Chiang, L. Wang, Construction and Building Materials 21 (2007) 1560. 

22.  A.  Delagrave,  J.  Bigas,  J.  Ollivier,  J. Marchand,  M.  Pigeon,  Advanced  Cement 

Based Materials 5 (1997) 86 

23.  L. Bertolini (Ed.), B. Elsener (Ed.), P. Pedeferri, R. B. Polder, Corrosion of Steel in 

Concrete: Prevention, Diagnosis, Repair, Wiley, 2004. 

24.  Basheer,  P.A.M.,  Permeation  Analysis,  in  Handbook  of  Analytical  Techniques  in 
Concrete Science and Technology, V.S. Ramachandran and J.J. Beaudoin, Editors. 
2001, Noyes Publications. 

12 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Cell and salt bridge [14] 

Figure 2 experimental Diffusion test 

Figure 3 Conceptual diagram integrated model 

13 

Mesh electrodesD.C. power supplyConcrete sampleSolid acrylic cellReservoir - NaOHReservoir - NaClCoatingKCl solutionCapillary pipe / salt bridgeReference electrode SCEPotential differencecathode and sample mid point 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4 Multilayer neural architecture used 

Figure 5 Current measured experimentally 

Figure 6 membrane potential measured 

14 

M.P. Membrane potentialat 3.6 hoursM.P. Membrane potentialat 6 hoursCurrent at startM.P. Membrane potentialat 1.2 hoursCurrent at 3.6 hoursCurrent at 6 hoursOH pore concentrationCl diffusion coeficientOH diffusion coeficientNa diffusion coeficientK diffusion coeficientCapacity factor of Cl bindingPorosityInput layerOutput layer-3.0-2.0-1.00.01.02.03.04.05.06.07.08.00123456Membrane potential [V]Time [h]aOPC 0.4BOPC 0.4 BOPC 0.5AOPC 0.5BOPC 0.6BOPC 0.6A-3.0-1.01.03.05.07.09.00123456Membrane potential [V]Time [h]OPC 0.4OPC 0.5OPC 0.6-3.0-1.01.03.05.07.09.00123456Membrane potential [V]Time [h]bc 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7 Chloride coefficients of diffusion - Dint-Fick  [m2/s] 

Figure 8 Transient mid point Membrane Potential and current simulated and measured 

15 

020040060080010000246Current [mAmp]Time [h]OPC 4MeasuredCalculated-8.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.00246Membrane potential [V]Time [h]OPC 4MeasuredCalculated020040060080010000246Current [mAmp]Time [h]OPC 5MeasuredCalculated-8.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.00246Membrane potential [V]Time [h]OPC 5MeasuredCalculated020040060080010000246Current [mAmp]Time [h]OPC 6MeasuredCalculated-8.0-6.0-4.0-2.00.02.04.06.08.00246Membrane potential [V]Time [h]OPC 6MeasuredCalculated 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9 Porosity and binding capacity factor calculated  

Figure 10 Intrinsic diffusion coefficients calculated 

OPC 6 

OPC 5 

OPC 4 

Figure 11 Relationship between the calculated chloride diffusion coefficients 

16 

0.1700.1750.1800.1850.1900.1950.2000.2050.2100.300.500.70Calculated open porosityWater binder ratio0.2000.2500.3000.3500.4000.4500.5000.300.500.70Binding capacity factor Water binder ratioab0.00E+005.00E-111.00E-101.50E-102.00E-102.50E-103.00E-103.50E-10OPC 4OPC 5OPC 6Coefficient of Diffusion  Dint-Fick [m2/s]Dint-ClDint-OHDint-NaDint-k 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12 Total current at 864 hours (36 days) 

Figure 13 Chloride profile at 90 days  

TABLES 

Mix 

w/b 

OPC 4 
OPC 5 
OPC 6 

0.4 
0.5 
0.6 

OPC 
[Kg/m3] 
400 
400 
400 

Fine agg. 
[Kg/m3] 
705 
664 
622 

Coarse agg. 
[Kg/m3] 
1058 
995 
933 

Water 
[Kg/m3] 
160 
200 
240 

Table 1 Concrete mix design 

17 

-2.0E-03-1.0E-030.0E+001.0E-032.0E-033.0E-034.0E-035.0E-03050100150Current [A]Distance [mm](1) Current control model (zero current)(2) Model (non-zero current, no voltage correction)(3) Equation 9020040060080010001200140004080120160Cl Concentration [mol/m3]Distance [mm](1) Current control model -zero current (properties calculated)(2) Model with non-zero current, no voltage correction (properties calculated)(3) Model with no binding, no voltage correction and just diffusion of Cl (Dint-cl calculated)(4) Equation 7 (Dint-cl calculated)(5) Equation 7 (Dint-Fick) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
