Corrosion Rate of Steel in Concrete — From Laboratory to Reinforced Co
Breadcrumbs Section. Click here to navigate to respective pages.
Chapter
Chapter
Corrosion Rate of Steel in Concrete — From Laboratory to Reinforced Concrete Structures
DOI link for Corrosion Rate of Steel in Concrete — From Laboratory to Reinforced Concrete Structures
Corrosion Rate of Steel in Concrete — From Laboratory to Reinforced Concrete Structures
Click here to navigate to parent product.
ABSTRACT
Condition assessment, control of the efficiency and durability of restoration work and service life prediction of reinforced concrete structures need rapid, non-destructive techniques to assess corrosion of the rebars and provide a quantitative measure of the instantaneous corrosion rate. Electrochemical techniques to measure corrosion rates of steel in concrete are based on the determination of the polarisation resistance, R , and in laboratory experiments comparable results are obtained with different techniques. Polarisation resistance measurements on-site have to take into account the following points: non-homogeneous current distribution between counter electrode and rebar network, changes of R p with daily and seasonal fluctuations in temperature and humidity, influence of the type of instrument and measurement principle. Finally, the conversion of the experimentally measured R p,eff to a specific polarisation resistance R p * (or the instantaneous corrosion rate) requires a correct compensation of the ohmic resistance and a knowledge of the actively corroding area.
Condition assessment, control of the efficiency and durability of restoration work and service life prediction of reinforced concrete structures need rapid, non-destructive techniques to assess corrosion of the rebars and provide a quantitative measure of the instantaneous corrosion rate. Electrochemical techniques to measure corrosion rates of steel in concrete are based on the determination of the polarisation resistance, R , and in laboratory experiments comparable results are obtained with different techniques. Polarisation resistance measurements on-site have to take into account the following points: non-homogeneous current distribution between counter electrode and rebar network, changes of R p with daily and seasonal fluctuations in temperature and humidity, influence of the type of instrument and measurement principle. Finally, the conversion of the experimentally measured R p,eff to a specific polarisation resistance R p * (or the instantaneous corrosion rate) requires a correct compensation of the ohmic resistance and a knowledge of the actively corroding area.
Policies Policies Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Cookie Policy Accessibility
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Cookie Policy
Accessibility
Journals Journals Taylor & Francis Online
Taylor & Francis Online
Corporate Corporate Taylor & Francis Group
Taylor & Francis Group
Help & Contact Help & Contact Students/Researchers Librarians/Institutions
Students/Researchers
Librarians/Institutions
Connect with us
Connect with us
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067 5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG © 2025 Informa UK Limited