Abstract Concrete structures are often subjected to harsh environmental conditions, and problems such as corrosion will greatly limit their service life and safety. Stray current is one of the factors that can be easily ignored but seriously affect concrete structure. Therefore, the study of the influence of stray current on concrete structure is conducive to understanding the performance and corrosion mechanism of concrete structure, providing technical support for protecting concrete structure, and improving its service life and safety. In this experiment, the effect of stray current and chloride ion interaction on the corrosion of reinforced concrete structure was studied, and the protective effect of the coating on reinforced concrete was studied by using Zn-Ni alloy plating solution. Electrochemical workstation, silver nitrate spraying, scanning electron microscope (SEM), energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) and direct observation were used to simulate and compare the corrosion experiments under different current intensities. By analyzing the influence of 0.05 and 0.10 A stray currents on concrete corrosion, the chloride penetration resistance of concrete structures was evaluated, and blank control experiments were set for different current intensity and different energizing time. The corrosion resistance of the steel bar coated with Zn-Ni alloy is compared with the steel bar without changing the coating under the same corrosion conditions. The results show that the corrosion tendency of concrete structures will be further increased under the action of stray current and chloride ion coupling, and the corrosion reaction will be accelerated. In addition, at the same time, the higher the simulated current, the more serious the corrosion of concrete structure; Under the same simulated current, the longer the electrification time, the worse the resistance of concrete structure to chloride ion erosion. Moreover, the corrosion resistance of the steel bar coated with Zn-Ni alloy is better. In summary, this study concludes that the coupling of stray current and chloride ion causes damage to the corrosion of concrete structures, and the current intensity and energized time are proportional to the corrosion degree, and the modified Zn-Ni alloy coated steel bar has better corrosion resistance
Effect of stray current on corrosion of concrete structure and improvement experiment of reinforcement coating