The Corrosion Process in Reinforced Concrete | 1 | The State of the Ar
Breadcrumbs Section. Click here to navigate to respective pages.
Chapter
Chapter
The Corrosion Process in Reinforced Concrete
DOI link for The Corrosion Process in Reinforced Concrete
The Corrosion Process in Reinforced Concrete
Click here to navigate to parent product.
ABSTRACT
Modern structures in aggressive environments are increasingly being engineered to achieve a life expectancy based on the impenetrability of the concrete to chloride ions. These predictions are normally based on Fick's laws of diffusion even though it is commonly known that this is an over simplification of the transport situation in concrete. There have been significant attempts to improve the actual life of a reinforced concrete structure by changing the material properties of both the reinforcement and concrete. As the exposure time increases, the rate of corrosion reduces, as the oxide layer provides a barrier to ionic, atomic and gaseous transport. An experiment was undertaken where the specimen size was varied in the same experimental procedure. It was found with exactly the same experimental conditions and procedures that reinforced concrete samples with 1 cm, 10 cm and 100 cm lengths required very different chloride concentrations to initiate corrosion.
Modern structures in aggressive environments are increasingly being engineered to achieve a life expectancy based on the impenetrability of the concrete to chloride ions. These predictions are normally based on Fick's laws of diffusion even though it is commonly known that this is an over simplification of the transport situation in concrete. There have been significant attempts to improve the actual life of a reinforced concrete structure by changing the material properties of both the reinforcement and concrete. As the exposure time increases, the rate of corrosion reduces, as the oxide layer provides a barrier to ionic, atomic and gaseous transport. An experiment was undertaken where the specimen size was varied in the same experimental procedure. It was found with exactly the same experimental conditions and procedures that reinforced concrete samples with 1 cm, 10 cm and 100 cm lengths required very different chloride concentrations to initiate corrosion.
Policies Policies Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Cookie Policy Accessibility
Privacy Policy
Terms & Conditions
Cookie Policy
Accessibility
Journals Journals Taylor & Francis Online
Taylor & Francis Online
Corporate Corporate Taylor & Francis Group
Taylor & Francis Group
Help & Contact Help & Contact Students/Researchers Librarians/Institutions
Students/Researchers
Librarians/Institutions
Connect with us
Connect with us
Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067 5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG © 2025 Informa UK Limited